---
title: "Generative AI"
teaching: 30
exercises: 1
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- What is generative AI?
- How can I safely use generative AI in my work?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Show examples of generative AI
- Discuss some potential dangers and pitfalls of generative AI


::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Introduction

Generative AI is AI that creates or generates data. Since the early 2020s, there has been a lot of news about large language models, especially chatbots such as ChatGPT, Copilot, and LLaMA. There are also many programs which can create images such as Stable Diffusion, Midjourney and DALL-E. Some such programs can be used not only to generate images, but to transfer styles.

The potential uses of such technologies are quite broad in the field of medical imaging. Potentially such tools can even be used in the interpretation of medical images as well as a plethora of other tasks. Obviously participants in this course may be particularly interested in the facts that large language models (LLMs) can be used to generate code, and some models may be able to generate vast quantities of synthetic image or text data. Research is ongoing. There is also an ongoing debate about the safety of such models. What is certain is that depending upon the software or model you use, data given into the system may become the property of the software owners. Think twice before entering any patient data into such a system. Try to understand what might happen to the data. Does it stay on your server or go into the cloud somewhere (which may be then sent to data storage for the company that made the software)? 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: instructor

Inline instructor notes: if Zenodo is unavailable ...

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Using generative AI well

### Using generative AI safely

- Never upload patient data away from your own servers
- Try to use systems that can be run locally
- Do not assume text generated by a large language model (LLM) is reality based
- Do not assume code generated by an LLM does not contain potentially harmful code
- Check the intellectual property and all ethical issues around how you are using a gen AI model
- Document your use of models in academic work
- Be aware that the corpus such models are trained on may introduce biases

Stable Diffusion is an open source system that can be run locally. Older versions probably needs some GPUs to run on.
One downside to this tool, and many others like it, is that the model is not trained or changed by you, you can't put in your own dataset.


:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## What is safe

Can you think of a couple risks of a model run completely on your machine?

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Solution

One risk of any model is that it could contain malicious code. Any model run entirely locally will need to be downloaded to your machine. There is no garuntee that such a model will not contain malware. We therefore encourage the use of open souce models.

Another risk of some models is that the content generated will not be worth the environmental costs. The creation and maintenence of such models uses an astounding amount of resources including carbon and water. We do not suggest running models like ChatGPT endlessly. Even when you run a model locally, this is still in some sense a risk. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Using generative programs effectively

The content generated by generative tools will differ based on exactly the words or images entered. The shaping of the words input is often called prompt engineering. 

A typical approach towards making content to balance a dataset for machine learning might include first understanding the dataset balance by important labels, then describing images with such labels and only then build prompts based on tthe description of label categories with fewer images. Such an approach limits the use of the model, which has risks and impact, towards useful outcomes.

Remember that content generation may be in some senses a nearly stochastic process. Therefore you may need to change prompts, and even sequences of prompts. 


:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

- Generative programs can create synthetic data which may help improve many algorithms
- There are limitation to generative AI models
- Running a program locally on your own server is safer than a program which sends prompts to other servers
- Patient data should be entered into most programs with caution
- Many policies are in place to ensure safe and ethical use of such tools across institutions.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
